Add MCP Connectors documentation (#9757)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/mcp/mcp-connector.md

---
layout: default
title: Connecting to an external MCP server
parent: Using MCP tools
grand_parent: Agents and tools
nav_order: 10
---

# Connecting to an external MCP server 
**Introduced 3.0**
{: .label .label-purple }

This is an experimental feature and is not recommended for use in a production environment. For updates on the progress of the feature or if you want to leave feedback, join the discussion on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/).
{: .warning}

> OpenSearch supports agentic workflows using [agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/#agents). While OpenSearch provides built-in tools for running complex queries, [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction) enables integration with external tools and data sources. MCP is an open protocol standard that provides a standardized way for AI models to connect to external data sources and tools, acting as a "universal adapter" for remote MCP server tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch supports agentic workflows using [agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/). While OpenSearch provides built-in tools for running complex queries, [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction) enables integration with external tools and data sources. MCP is an open protocol standard that provides a standardized way for AI models to connect to external data sources and tools, acting as a "universal adapter" for remote MCP server tools.
```

Currently, OpenSearch only supports MCP servers that use the Server-Sent Events (SSE) protocol. Standard Input/Output (`stdio`) protocol is not supported.
{: .note}

The following example demonstrates using MCP tools in agentic workflows.

## Prerequisites

Before using MCP tools, you must complete the following prerequisites.

### Enable MCP and configure trusted connector endpoints

- Enable the MCP protocol by configuring the `plugins.ml_commons.mcp_feature_enabled` setting.
- Configure trusted connector endpoints in the `plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex` setting. For security purposes, this setting uses regex patterns to define which MCP server URLs are allowed.

To configure both settings, send the following request:

```json
POST /_cluster/settings/
{
  "persistent": {
    "plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex": [
      "<mcp server url>"
    ],
    "plugins.ml_commons.mcp_feature_enabled": "true"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Set up an MCP server

> Ensure you have a running MCP-compliant server that is accessible from your OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure you have a running MCP server that is accessible from your OpenSearch cluster.
```

| `url` | String | Yes | The complete base URL of the MCP server, including protocol, hostname, and port if not using the default port (for example, `https://my-mcp-server.com:8443`). |
| `credential` | Object | Yes | Contains sensitive authentication information such as API keys or tokens. Values stored in this object can be securely referenced in the `headers` section using the `${credential.*}` syntax. |
| `headers` | Object | No | HTTP headers to include with requests to the MCP server. For authentication headers, use the `${credential.*}` syntax to reference values from the `credential` object (e.g., `"Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.mcp_server_key}"`).  |

The response contains the connector ID:

```json
{
  "connector_id": "NZ2W2ZUBZ_3SyqdOvh2n",
}
```

## Step 2: Register a model

Register any externally hosted large language model (LLM) using a connector. For a list of supported models, see [Supported connectors]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/remote-models/supported-connectors/).

For example, to register an OpenAI chat model, send the following request:

```json

> POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register

Reviewer: Do we need to deploy the model here by adding `?deploy=true`?

Author: It works even if we do not specify it

      "openAI_key": "<YOUR_API_KEY>"
    },
    "actions": [
      {
        "action_type": "predict",
        "method": "POST",
        "url": "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions",
        "headers": {
          "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.openAI_key}"
        },
        "request_body": "{ \"model\": \"${parameters.model}\", \"messages\": [{\"role\":\"developer\",\"content\":\"${parameters.system_instruction}\"},${parameters._chat_history:-}{\"role\":\"user\",\"content\":\"${parameters.prompt}\"}${parameters._interactions:-}], \"tools\": [${parameters._tools:-}],\"parallel_tool_calls\":${parameters.parallel_tool_calls},\"tool_choice\": \"${parameters.tool_choice}\" }"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The response contains the model ID:

```json
{
  "task_id": "K_iQfpYBjoQOEoSHN3wU",
  "status": "CREATED",
  "model_id": "LPiQfpYBjoQOEoSHN3zH"
}
```

To check the status of the operation, provide the task ID to the [Tasks API]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/tasks-apis/get-task/). Once the registration is complete, the task `state` changes to `COMPLETED`.

## Step 3: Register an agent for accessing MCP tools

> Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_ agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#conversational-agents) or _plan, execute, and reflect_ agent types. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/conversational/) or [_plan-execute-reflect_]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/) agent types. 
```

Reviewer: Will incorporate this comment once #9743 is merged.

> Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_ agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#conversational-agents) or _plan and execute_ agent types. 

Reviewer: Is _plan and execute_ agent the same as _plan, execute, and reflect_ agent described in [this PR](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/pull/9743/)?

> Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_ agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#conversational-agents) or _plan and execute_ agent types. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_ agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#conversational-agents) or _plan, execute, and reflect_ agent types. 
<!-- TODO: add a link to the agent type when 9743 is merged -->
```

> <!-- TODO: add a link to the agent type when 9743 is merged -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To enable external MCP tools, include one or more MCP connectors in your agent's configuration.

Each connector must specify the following parameters in the `parameters.mcp_connectors` array.

| Parameter | Data type | Required | Description | 
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `mcp_connector_id` | String | Yes | The connector ID of the MCP connector. | 

> | `tool_filters` | Array | No | An array of Java-style regular expressions that specify which tools from the MCP server to make available to the agent. A tool will be included if it matches at least one of the regular expressions in the array. If omitted or set to an empty array, all tools exposed by the connector will be available. Use `^/$` anchors or literal strings to precisely match tool names. For example, `^get_forecast` matches any tool starting with "get_forecast", while `search_indices` matches only "search_indices".|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tool_filters` | Array | No | An array of Java-style regular expressions that specify which tools from the MCP server to make available to the agent. A tool will be included if it matches at least one of the regular expressions in the array. If omitted or set to an empty array, all tools exposed by the connector will be available. Use the `^` or `$` anchors or literal strings to precisely match tool names. For example, `^get_forecast` matches any tool starting with "get_forecast", while `search_indices` matches only "search_indices".|
```

Reviewer: @rithin-pullela-aws Just a couple of final comments.

> In this example, you'll register a conversational agent using the connector ID created in Step 1. The MCP server has two tools available (`get_alerts` and `get_forecasts`), but due to our regex pattern `^get_alerts$`, only the `get_alerts` tool will be included in the agent's configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, you'll register a conversational agent using the connector ID created in Step 1. The MCP server has two tools available (`get_alerts` and `get_forecasts`), but only the `get_alerts` tool will be included in the agent's configuration because it matches the specified regex pattern `^get_alerts$`:
```

Currently, OpenSearch only supports MCP servers that use the Server-Sent Events (SSE) protocol. Standard Input/Output (`stdio`) protocol is not supported.
{: .note}

The following example demonstrates using MCP tools in agentic workflows.

## Prerequisites

Before using MCP tools, you must complete the following prerequisites.

### Enable MCP and configure trusted connector endpoints

- Enable the MCP protocol by configuring the `plugins.ml_commons.mcp_feature_enabled` setting.
- Configure trusted connector endpoints in the `plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex` setting. For security purposes, this setting uses regex patterns to define which MCP server URLs are allowed.

To configure both settings, send the following request:

```json
POST /_cluster/settings/
{
  "persistent": {
    "plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex": [
      "<mcp server url>"
    ],
    "plugins.ml_commons.mcp_feature_enabled": "true"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Set up an MCP server

Ensure you have a running MCP server that is accessible from your OpenSearch cluster.

## Step 1: Create an MCP connector

> An MCP Connector stores connection details and credentials for your MCP server. To create an MCP connector, send the following request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An MCP connector stores connection details and credentials for your MCP server. To create an MCP connector, send the following request:
```

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
  "name":        "My MCP Connector",
  "description": "Connects to the external MCP server for weather tools",
  "version":     1,
  "protocol":    "mcp_sse",
  "url":         "https://my-mcp-server.domain.com",
  "credential": {
    "mcp_server_key": "THE_MCP_SERVER_API_KEY"
  },
  "headers": {
    "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.mcp_server_key}"
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The following table describes the connector parameters. For more information about standard connector parameters, see [Configuration parameters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/remote-models/blueprints/#configuration-parameters).

| Parameter | Data type | Required | Description |
|:----------|:---------|:------------|

> | `protocol` | String | Yes | Specify `mcp_sse` to use the SSE protocol (currently the only supported protocol type).  |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `protocol` | String | Yes | Specify `mcp_sse` to use the SSE protocol (currently the only supported protocol type for MCP).  |
```

> | `protocol` | String | Yes | Specify `mcp_sse` to use the Server-Sent Events protocol (currently the only supported protocol type).  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `protocol` | String | Yes | Specify `mcp_sse` to use the SSE protocol (currently the only supported protocol type).  |
```

> | `url` | String | Yes | The complete base URL of the MCP server, including protocol, hostname, and port if not using the default port (for example, `https://my-mcp-server.com:8443`). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `url` | String | Yes | The complete base URL of the MCP server, including protocol, hostname, and port, if not using the default port (for example, `https://my-mcp-server.com:8443`). |
```

| `credential` | Object | Yes | Contains sensitive authentication information such as API keys or tokens. Values stored in this object can be securely referenced in the `headers` section using the `${credential.*}` syntax. |

> | `headers` | Object | No | HTTP headers to include with requests to the MCP server. For authentication headers, use the `${credential.*}` syntax to reference values from the `credential` object (e.g., `"Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.mcp_server_key}"`).  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `headers` | Object | No | The HTTP headers to include with requests to the MCP server. For authentication headers, use the `${credential.*}` syntax to reference values from the `credential` object (for example, `"Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.mcp_server_key}"`).  |
```

      }
    ]
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The response contains the model ID:

```json
{
  "task_id": "K_iQfpYBjoQOEoSHN3wU",
  "status": "CREATED",
  "model_id": "LPiQfpYBjoQOEoSHN3zH"
}
```

To check the status of the operation, provide the task ID to the [Tasks API]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/api/tasks-apis/get-task/). Once the registration is complete, the task `state` changes to `COMPLETED`.

## Step 3: Register an agent for accessing MCP tools

Currently, MCP tools can only be used with [_conversational_ agents]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/index/#conversational-agents) or _plan, execute, and reflect_ agent types. 
<!-- TODO: add a link to the agent type when 9743 is merged -->

To enable external MCP tools, include one or more MCP connectors in your agent's configuration.

Each connector must specify the following parameters in the `parameters.mcp_connectors` array.

| Parameter | Data type | Required | Description | 
|:--- |:--- |:--- |:--- |
| `mcp_connector_id` | String | Yes | The connector ID of the MCP connector. | 

> | `tool_filters` | Array | No | An array of Java-style regular expressions that specify which tools from the MCP server to make available to the agent. If omitted or set to an empty array, all tools exposed by the connector will be available. Use `^/$` anchors or literal strings to precisely match tool names. For example, `^get_forecast` matches any tool starting with get_forecast, while `search_indices` matches only `search_indices`.|

Reviewer 2: Should "get_forecast" be in quotation marks, as below?

Reviewer: Yes!

> | `tool_filters` | Array | No | An array of Java-style regular expressions that specify which tools from the MCP server to make available to the agent. If omitted or set to an empty array, all tools exposed by the connector will be available. Use `^/$` anchors or literal strings to precisely match tool names. For example, `^get_forecast` matches any tool starting with get_forecast, while `search_indices` matches only `search_indices`.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tool_filters` | Array | No | An array of Java-style regular expressions that specify which tools from the MCP server to make available to the agent. If omitted or set to an empty array, all tools exposed by the connector will be available. Use `^/$` anchors or literal strings to precisely match tool names. For example, `^get_forecast` matches any tool starting with "get_forecast", while `search_indices` matches only "search_indices".|
```

> In this example, you'll register a conversational agent using the connector ID created in Step 1. The following request specifies to use only tools starting with "get_forecast" or tools exactly named "search_indices":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, you'll register a conversational agent using the connector ID created in Step 1. The following request specifies that only tools starting with "get_forecast" or tools exactly named "search_indices" should be used:
```

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/_register
{
  "name":        "Weather & Search Bot",
  "type":        "conversational",
  "description": "Uses MCP to fetch forecasts and OpenSearch indices",
  "llm": {
    "model_id": "<MODEL_ID_FROM_STEP_2>",
    "parameters": {
      "max_iteration": 5,
      "system_instruction": "You are a helpful assistant.",
      "prompt": "${parameters.question}"
    }
  },
  "memory": {
    "type": "conversation_index"
  },
  "parameters": {
    "_llm_interface": "openai/v1/chat/completions",
    "mcp_connectors": [
      {
        "mcp_connector_id": "<MCP_CONNECTOR_ID_FROM_STEP_1`>",
        "tool_filters": [
          "^get_forecast",    

>           "search_indices"    

Reviewer 3: Why add this ? 

Suggest explain what tools are in the MCP server and what tools will be used with this filter

Author: Addressed this comment in a new commit, please take a look

        ]
      }
    ]
  },
  "tools": [
    { "type": "ListIndexTool" },
    { "type": "SearchIndexTool" }
  ],
  "app_type": "os_chat"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The resonse contains the agent ID:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The response contains the agent ID:
```

| Parameter | Data type | Required | Description |
|:----------|:---------|:------------|

> | `protocol` | String | Yes | Specify `mcp_sse` to use the SSE protocol (currently the only supported protocol type for MCP).  |

Reviewer: I would remove "currently". This is implied.

    "mcp_connectors": [
      {
        "mcp_connector_id": "<MCP_CONNECTOR_ID_FROM_STEP_1>",

>         /* MCP server has get_alerts and get_forecasts tools, but only get_alerts will be included due to regex pattern */

Reviewer: @rithin-pullela-aws We have a copy button on the requests, so they must be executable as is. Please move this to the intro sentence on line 155 and delete from here.

Author: Sure will update
